Um, we will, I'm
Here for 15, eh? Yeah.
But I can stay long if you want.
I've got, I'm not, I'm not gonna make opening comments
'cause my speech, my opening comments is 15
minutes, so I won't get back.
I'll just, I'll just go straight to your Todd,
Right? Yeah, yeah.
So no comments from me.
That's, that's totally fine. Well, firstly, um, just wanting
to acknowledge these bit of weather going on
around New Zealand at the moment.
Yes. And just wanting to check in with you
and the team that you are Okay. For everything
We are. Thank you for
checking though. Yep. No, thank you.
Are, I mean, obviously as you know,
Some nervousness in Auckland around rainfall.
A hundred percent. A hundred percent.
After what happened in 2000? Uh, was it 2002? 3 23 23.
Two three mm. 23. Yeah.
I mean, there, there's still, without a doubt
that's still in the forefront of Auckland's Mines.
Um, so thank you for that.
But as you know, the ma team are down there.
We've changed the reporting around that a bit,
and so we're just getting regular updates on,
on what's happening up there.
We have had a bit of a tornado
In Ran In Ran.
Yeah. Yeah, that's, um, Steph was saying it's,
uh, a caravan.
Yeah. Caravan one. Caravan one person injured. Yeah. Yep.
And 200 homes without power, is that right?
According to reports,
Is it? Yep.
Yeah. Well, we appreciate you being here
and, um, we, um, don't mind if you're looking at your phones
or you need to rush out at any point in time.
Oh, thank you. Just, um, dealing with that. Thanks, Camilla.
I appreciate it. Please, um, feel free to do that.
So yeah, thank you for being here with us.
Um, we've got a number of, um, issues to Canvas.
I think probably the, if I might, um, just start
and we'll go to Francisco.
The, I guess the major thing that the committee discussed,
one of the major things the committee discussed
with you last time you were here.
And, um, I suppose something that we are waiting for
to work on as a committee is the emergency management bill.
So I just wanted to give you the opportunity,
just give it a bit of an update on, um, progress with that.
We know that there's been some, um, kind
of pre-consultation, um, with the roadmap
and some sort of public submissions around that.
So if you could give us an update on that, please.
Yeah, so just acknowledge the NMA team, um,
the policy team and also, and like,
and Camilla, you were part of the road show that we sort
of went on in terms of getting out there and,
and consultant, um, with, you know, all the stakeholders,
um, that we wanted to make sure were ca their views were
captured and they had the input into the bill.
Um, really proud of this bill. Um, and it's ready to go.
Um, and so you'll see that there'll be an announcement on
that, you know, in the next, um, couple of weeks.
Have you been briefed up on that? No. No. Okay.
So we'll make sure that we've, um, that we,
that we give you a brief all of you briefing on.
Thank you. Appreciate
It. Okay. So expect
announcement in a couple weeks, Francisco,
I've got a second on there. Yep.
Actually, um, during the sort of consultation process,
about a quarter of people kind
of submitted opposition to the bill.
Can you give us, uh, I guess an overview of the themes
of why people were opposed to, um, the upcoming bill?
I wasn't actually aware that there was anyone
that was opposed to the bill.
Okay. Were there people that were opposed to parts of it
or, um, um, are, are you talking about the, the
where people sat or where they sat on the keg
or the executive or, yeah.
Does anyone want, can anyone, um, can you be more,
can you be specific in terms of what part
of the bill they're sort of opposed to?
Um, I'm not quite just judging, I just,
I don't know if we have any granularity information.
We just, we've just been told
that it's been around about a quarter. Yeah. We're opposed,
We're opposed to the bill. Yeah.
Yeah. Or express some reservation.
That's pretty going though. Yeah. Yeah.
I think, um, um, we'll have to get some more, uh,
granularity on that and come back to the committee.
Okay. And certainly, obviously there's some announcements
to be made in the next week or two, uh,
and once the bill's been introduced,
we can go into more detail
on that. Yeah. But we don't have that.
Did the committee just, did you just get some very
high level information?
I'm confused about, so hold on.
If the legislation hasn't been introduced,
how can some, how can people be closed?
So there was a, there was a process, um,
where a roadmap in relation to what would be in the bill.
Yeah. And there was a public consultation process.
And so it's, it's, it isn't the bill itself. Correct.
It's an actual document. It's the
consultation discussion document.
It's the discussion document that preceded the bill.
But that would be like the Retirement Villages Act review
saying, these are the three main things
and people saying, no, I want something else in it.
But you haven't actually seen
what the Retirement Village's review legislation looks like
and then saying Yeah.
Tracking that those people are instantly opposed place
Getting, I mean, I think it's, it's, we,
I'm sure we'll hear the reasons why, um,
when the bill is its committee,
why people are opposed to it.
It did seem like a abnormally large number for,
as you've correctly pointed out, talking for a bill
that hasn't even been,
Nobody's seen public Yet.
So I was curious to see why there was such
opposition to Pretty good,
Pretty good Lots To it.
There may have been issues brought forward for separate,
for different parts through the consultation,
but I think that, um, I, I, I don't,
I definitely don't get the feeling at all having been in
quite a few of those meetings that there was any, um,
clear opposition to the bill brought forward, right.
That there was general recognition we had to do it just
that people wanted to see that the, uh, the inputs
and the issues that are being brought forward were being
considered as being part of that bill.
But I think, look, I, we've been tried, we've tried
to engage and be as transparent
and share as much information as we can
through the passage of this.
And, um, and I, we will continue to do that. What's
The source?
It was in the briefing that we, the previous
Briefing, we just, but 75% of people support you.
That's great. So that's pretty good going.
Um, minister, I wonder if we could look at something else,
which is, you've expressed some interest in looking at a
common operating model for, um, for all
of the different groups around New Zealand.
Yes. Would you, would you be able to kind
of explain the purpose of that
and maybe give us an update on
Yeah. I think
That, um, where that program is
At, look, I, I remember when I, um,
when I first became minister,
and I dunno if you remember Camilla, we had a, um,
we had a local state of emergency that was sort
of right down through the east coast actually,
but it was in raf it was down into, through down to S Bay.
And, um, Dave actually took me, we went up to Raffe.
We met with a guy called Ben Green,
who I think would probably be recognized as fantastic is,
yeah, he's, he, he's quite simply outstanding.
And, um, and he brought forward in that meeting with me,
the fact that we needed to look at
the common operating pitch.
And that was my question too, is terms of, um, what,
what do you actually mean by that?
And quite simply, it means that, uh, as we normally often do
as Kiwis, um, is that different councils, um,
have invested in sometimes bespoke systems
to support their emergency management.
And it means that we do not have one comrade operating
picture throughout the whole country that, um,
anyone can plug into a news and you get visibility
and share data and information.
And so, um, that has been one of the priorities in terms
of the work that I've been taking forward
and through the cabinet process, is to, um,
make an investment into a common
operating. Thank you, Andy.
One of the things I know that, um, when I was up there,
um, being also showed off a lot of, uh, great kit,
which I think they, they were not only common operating
picture, but also some common idea
of having a common kit that's around the place. Oh. He,
Like, he just got Desalination for,
um, tents and all kinds of other
Stuff. Well, he just got an award
for the desalination. Yeah.
Um, you know, uh, kit that he put together.
Yeah. Which is great stuff. Yeah.
My, my question though, in terms of, um,
each individual locality is the ability to be able
to respond in terms of kit, um,
because there are some places,
I've just been on the West Coast
And They're very nervous about, you know, lack
of things like Bailey Bridges
and that sort of stuff, which apparently are at NCT
a's got on the other side of the island.
So we'll get 'em there. If there's a,
there's an Alpine Fault event, so you, okay.
We'll see them next week or the week
after, fuel supplies, those sort of things.
Are you focused in any way,
or is there a way of making sure
that we do have some focus across the country
as a whole about vulnerabilities in particular areas
to make sure they've got kit
or access to kit that will help 'em
through if there is a major event?
So the short answer is yes, we do like visibility
or where critical infrastructure
or support is, is in the country.
Yeah. But I'll probably let Dave speak to, um, you know, um,
more detail around that.
Yeah. Uh, the, the reality of it is, is that,
um, we're a small country.
I know. And, um, and the reality of it is we keep on board,
um, to stockpile enormous amounts of, uh, equipment.
Yeah, I get that. But we are very good at being able
to track, find it, know where it is,
and get it in place. Equipment.
I, I, I think it's the suggestion I think they'll make,
it's where's the most appropriate place
to stockpile what we've already got.
What's that, where's the most appropriate place
to stockpile what we've already got?
I think it's the question they were raising.
I think it's, that's said a legitimate question.
Yeah. So that's how it Gets divvied around.
Yeah. Well, and it is a legitimate question,
but to, to be honest with you, Andy, at the moment, um,
central government has not taken any steps to say
that we are gonna take control of a consolidated
or, uh, point to start taking assets
outta regions, things like that.
And I think that you would find
that there'd probably be quite a bit
of resistance to that in that case.
They're central government assets, though.
Well, central government's the issue, we, we know
where central government assets are.
We know, you know, obviously the, they're our assets.
We know, um, how we can deploy them.
Klu, Southland is a classic example of how we had
to use central government assets quickly
to get the right generators to Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, I, I just have a couple of questions before you leave.
Um, so I just let you know what they are, so maybe enough
I can stay longer if you want. Madam Chair, there's no,
Well, you're welcome to stay as,
as long as you, as long as you want.
The, the first question is really, we did, um, hit discuss
as a committee after the emergency alarm alarms were used.
Were used, I think recently with,
I think it was a tsunami. Oh, warning.
The, um, public, um, Yeah. Yeah.
And, um, obviously that's, um, relatively new technology
that seems to be, be utilized in these emergency situations.
I know that it was utilized, I think in Dunedin as well,
and a number of other places.
So I just wanted to,
and we were gonna kind of specifically call, um, NEMA
and to give us a briefing on it.
Yes. But I think it's probably best
use of our time to discuss it here.
And so, just from your perspective as minister,
and we can go into a, a bit more detail maybe with the team,
um, that process of issuing an emergency alert, um,
what is the kind of criteria
that you would utilize for that?
And what are the kind of, some of the risks
and the pitfalls around, um, you know, using, not using it,
it must be a very difficult, um, it's decision.
And I wondered if you could just let us know your
Approach to that. Yes. So,
um, you're right,
it is a really difficult decision.
Um, and I'm probably just gonna be a bit of motive here
and just share my own thoughts on it, is that
when I became minister in Emergency management, um,
that it was, it had already been reported, um, I think
through several reports that have been done,
including je Prise.
One is that we tend to operate with a optimism bias, um,
which means, which, which is, we naturally tend
to think about the best case scenario
instead of the worst case scenario.
And, um, and there's also this inherent fear
of calling a local state of emergency
or making a decision around that
because, um, you're gonna generate a, the boy
that cried wolf response and, um,
and you're gonna dilute, um, the effectiveness of any, um,
you know, decisions
or, um, in the future, um, declarations in the future.
Me personally, um, I completely,
totally reject that approach.
Um, I think that we don't have the luxury of that anymore.
And I think that, um, with the amount of events
that we are having to deal with and, um,
and the fact that you are not only have the risk
of losing people, but also the amount of damage that's done.
And we all know how that really,
as the response is unfolding,
we're almost immediately into recovery.
Um, as, as you've seen Camilla at some of the events
that we've been to together.
Um, so I, I feel very strongly that we should go early,
um, with declarations.
We should make decisions early.
Um, and, and, and for me personally, um, I wanted to apply
that to the soon to the earthquake in Russia, um,
when it takes a while for the scientists
and it feels like an eternity, um, for them to be able to,
uh, gather the information that they need, um, for us
to be the dart boys that, um, Jenna had a big, um, role and,
and getting out there for us to gather that information, um,
is to actually make decisions and get things going.
So with that, um, public notification,
we're a island nation.
Um, I know that when I look in my own electorate,
I have literally hundreds of people, most of 'em,
senior Kiwis, who will go down to the beach to enjoy nature,
um, from about six o'clock in the morning.
And, um, and I did not feel that it was worth the risk
of having a tidal surge, um,
or a tsunami catch us outta left field.
And then, um, accepting the risk
that if you get caught in something like that,
you got a 90% chance of drowning
and we would've had body bags.
So, um, I just feel that we should go out
with the information now.
Yes, of course, we knew, I, I knew inherently
that we were gonna get a lot of noise
that would come outta the public and the boy that cried wolf
and ignore it, and all the rest of it.
That's up to people's own personal decision making around
how much they value, um, their own safety
or the safety of their family or the others around them.
Right. Or how much they consider our first responders
and avoiding putting them in a, uh, in a situation
where they're having to go to their aid.
Um, but I still, I still feel very strongly
that we should give people that information
and they can make their own decisions based on it.
And, um, and, uh, if, if we, if we had not done that,
and there had been a type of search
and we ended up with 20 body bags, you can imagine
what the headlines would've been, and myself
and Dave would be appearing in front of a committee
or appearing in front of you trying
to explain why we hadn't done it.
Um, so I, I guess in a nutshell, that's, um, that's,
that's my own personal approach in terms
of why I think we should be making these decisions going
early and being accept,
accept the fact we're gonna get a bit of heat.
And, um, you know, for, for about 48 hours,
I felt like the most unpopular guy in the country.
Um, but you just gotta live with that. Yeah.
And, um, and, and, um, and trust your gut and,
and make those decisions.
Now on saying that there is a, there is a science
behind it as well, without a doubt.
And I, I guess I'll turn to Dave to be able to talk to that,
to that side of it more. Yeah. Thanks,
Minister. Um, just following
up on the, the thresholds that are sort
of applied in terms of, um, the EMAs actually being issued,
uh, there's three key ones are severe
or extreme threat to life, health or property.
And that certainty of it occurring is greater than 50%,
or has already occurred,
and the people need to take responsive action
immediately or soon.
Now, those are the thresholds that are applied.
There's two elements to it.
One is the national advisories,
and they're put out to, um, all of the,
the key responders, civil defense groups, uh,
and so on, so that they can, um, bring that down
to localized effects in terms of where it is.
So if you're living in, on the high Cliffs of Taranaki,
for example, then you're not gonna be affected by a tsunami.
But they can, they can create a far greater granularity in
terms of those affected people.
Um, and the other one is, uh, the EMA.
And just to, to put it in perspective, um,
over the last 12 months,
there were 38 messages using the EMA, uh,
as opposed to, you know, the two
that we'll talk about in relation to Chuka, uh, tsunami,
which created all of the, uh, the media response,
but 38 of those messages, 15 for severe weather, 11
for fires, six for tsunami warnings,
four boil water notices, one missing person,
and the text message, uh, the test message that we did, uh,
in conjunction with Seven Sharp
and the Warriors game at the State is a great,
uh, a great event.
That one. But those, those messages, this 38,
that sounds really high, they're not all national.
So it goes out as a national warning,
or the fact that a first responder group such as police,
such as, um, fire
and emergency, have the authority to issue, uh, a,
um, an EMA for whatever the, the issue is that's developing,
uh, or situation that's developing.
And the other element with that, in terms
of particularly education of the public, uh, is the fact
that it doesn't take away, uh, from the requirement
to act on your,
we've just started a new campaign called Danger Sense, um,
but on the natural signs that are actually already there,
because something like an EMA is not going
to make much difference, uh, when the ang subduction zone,
uh, unzips, for example. Mm-hmm.
The, the other thing with it too is that we found out
that there's a few glitches in the system that, um, so
that was, you know, it's useful, um, to be able to identify
that and go back and start fixing those. Um,
Thank you. Thank that
thorough answer.
And I mean, I think it's a,
a really helpful thing to have on the record too.
We did have, um, I think a supplementary from DA question
from Francisco, if you did have time for those.
Yeah, yeah. It appreciate, That's very, very quick.
One minor one. But, um, a lot of the mayors,
particularly in the South island, were felt a bit unhappy
with the recent, um, emergency situation
that they were disenfranchised in terms of being able,
legally able to, uh,
declare a state emergency in their
own particular jurisdictions.
Obviously, they sort of, uh, raising his eyebrows, um,
because they were between, um, election
and swearing, a bit of anomaly.
So anomaly, is there something which we can
Behalf? Yeah, that's a good question.
I dunno, I,
I could ask the team if we've addressed that in, in the,
in the current bill, but yes, it was a bit of an anomaly
because I had to, um,
declare those states from emergency myself.
Yeah. However, um, it's, it's, that is not, um, arduous.
I, I understand that it was, it was,
it was quite simply the mayor's, um, contacting me
and saying that, uh, or contacting us.
Yeah. And then, um,
and then actually I had to a handwritten, um, declaration,
and I haven't done some handwriting for a long time,
found out how bad that was.
Um, but yeah, it's a really good point.
Um, uh,
I'm not sure if we've actually, are we addressing that?
Yeah, we are addressing it in the bell
because it is, it's, um, it hasn't actually had to be used
for quite some time, 20 plus years of being exposed to it.
So it's certainly a good opportunity to pick it
Up. We had to do it twice.
We had to do it for,
um, Klu South as well.
South. Yeah. Well, I know South South
and some of the North Canterbury ones too, isn't it?
But, but the other thing that was, um, the other thing
that I really liked about the Christchurch declaration is
that that was led by police events.
Um, and normally it would be the mayors, um,
and your chief executives and your, and your,
and your civil defense controllers.
Um, and I, and I, and I had a debrief with both police
and fes, and they just said, look, you know,
we are recognizing the fact that, um,
we've gotta make these decisions early.
We've gotta preposition our people.
We gotta try and get 'em in the right place.
And that was almost textbook in terms of, um, the way that
that was run and the way that, uh, it unfold.
So, yeah. Francisco.
Francisco. Well, thank you, chair. Thank you, minister.
Um, you've been minister for about, um, two years now.
Do you have a sense on
what the trend line has been like in terms
of emergency management events around the country?
Has the number been increasing? Is it steady?
That's a good, really good question.
Um, I'd have to go back
and have a look at the prior two or three years.
Um, I mean, you know, uh,
Something we pass around
That feels like there's, the trend has been increasing.
Yes. Um, I look, I think that, um,
I think in the last two years we've had about, um,
I think I'm up to about 18
or 19, um, local states for emergencies.
Yes. So, um, you know, we are a country
that's gonna continue to be that with these, um,
can I give this to Francisco?
Absolutely. Pass. Um, yeah.
Thank you. Just a good opportunity
to capture states of emergency.
I know you very much, Melissa.
We have used our time now, so, um, please feel free to,
if you, if you did want to, um, leave you, you can,
but if you wanna stay, you are also welcome. And we'll just
No, I, I, I'll go.
But before I go, um, uh, can I just,
Madam Chair, can I acknowledge you?
Um, because we made a commitment two years ago that we'd,
that I feel that, um, there's two things
as emergency management
and, um, national security that we should be, try to be
as bipartisan as we can on.
Um, and I just want to acknowledge your engagement.
I know that you're up in, um, Waikato recently, um, uh,
meeting up there with the c DM teams,
um, that is appreciated.
And, um, and I've appreciated
the work that we've done on this.
And I,
I'm excited about the work committee's gonna do, um, on the bill.
Yeah. And, uh, when the bill gets here.
Yeah. Well, we look forward to, um, uh,
Hearing you introduce it to us. Um,
Yes. Yes. Pre
seeing you guys, seeing you guys in the house.
Yeah. Pre post standby. Standby, standby.
Thank you very much. Yeah, thanks guys. Thanks very
Much. Thanks.
So you
Just have, um, some questions.
I don't know if, um, Andy, you had another primary, do you
Want to, uh, yeah, forward, Tim?
I think Tim's got, yeah.
Um, so was that, I was gonna start off with that issue
around, um, around where, um,
emergency management equipment is stored
and how well we, how well we align that to risk.
Uh, and I, I take the take minister's point around, um,
you know, not, it's not about going
and taking other people's fit, um,
but whether it is national equipment
and whether we've actually got it, you know,
a in the right place, whether we've got the right, um,
equipment, A particular example I'd give is, um,
so there's gonna be now fuel standards
to have certain amount of fuel stored that is all well
and good, but if all of that fuel is in certain locations,
it's not, in other locations, it's not terribly useful
to the lake, to the places which don't have the fuel.
So it's those kind of things.
And you know, as I said, bay Bridge is one
of the things the West Coast was
particularly, uh, anxious about.
Um, you know, could we rescue and whatever it might be.
And I, I take the point that we can't have too much of it,
kind of afford it, but it's how we,
how we put it, how we distribute it.
So it's likely to be able to get to place of potential risk.
Yeah. And, and it really is the, the art of it.
We know that there are some places
that are more vulnerable than others.
And, and you mentioned the West Coast
and fuel just recently.
They have, um, we've just actually, uh, funded, uh,
additional fuel for them Oh, excellent.
Uh, through the, the use of the, um, tanks that were used
during NS v, um,
which have been taken down to the West coast.
So there are elements with that.
But more importantly, we're doing a, um,
a significant review of all of the national, uh,
critical infrastructure requirements.
And that includes the development of MOUs
with different businesses, um,
because the reality is New Zealand can't afford against the
hazard, um, landscape that we have to, to manage,
uh, and store sufficient to meet every need
and every location.
So, so the critical part of that is,
is identifying the most vulnerable regions, um, identifying
with the other agencies such as MOT, uh,
what the most critical roots are.
And, and to use Bailey Bridges as an example, uh, ensuring
that they are in the right place.
One of the challenges that we've had is, is not, um,
not mapping sufficiently the criticality
of, um, logistics nodes like capabilities,
nodes, uh, and the vulnerabilities in terms of distribution.
Um, so it's all very well saying that, um, that we have,
actually, we don't, but we have, let's say field hospitals,
for example, that will be flowing in, in the event
of a big, uh, crisis.
But you've gotta know where
and how you're going to get them from the airhead
to the location, the ambulance exchange point, and so on.
So we've got a piece of work that's been, um,
being developed over the last 12 months.
We've employed somebody specifically for that.
Uh, and, and they're a strategic logistics expert.
Um, but it can only be done, uh, as a whole of society, uh,
where you have, um, both nodes, uh, in businesses,
uh, in communities
and nationally in terms of those, uh, capabilities.
So if I could just follow up one, one quick thing on that.
So again, I, I will use the West coast
because that's where most recently been,
but one of the bits there, of course, is you've got the
very, very mining, um, operations,
which have a whole lot of heavy kit.
So those are the kind
of organizations you'll be talking about in terms of, uh,
MOUs to, to get hold of kit if need be in the event
of an emergency, you know,
diggers and things like that to clear
If, if need be.
We don't have anything set up with the mining, um, uh,
companies down there, but I know that, uh,
west Coast work very closely with them, um, particularly,
I can't remember the name, but Richard Op.
Yeah. Uh, and they, they are very willing to support
and lean into any significant event.
Yeah. Uh, that is down.
But that's the principle That, that is the principle.
Um, doc's, the other big organization down in the West coast
that has capacity in terms of, um, being sims trained,
uh, as are mining companies, uh, having, uh, communications,
knowing the area, knowing where the vulnerabilities are, uh,
and, and an organizational capability
to actually lean into that. Uh, that sort of,
It was, it was the principle.
I was using it as an illustration, but
The principle across country.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank you. Thank you, Tom.
Hey, I just want to ask about EOCs.
I know in the past I've often asked about the, the cop,
and there's been a bit of discussion even today about that
and, you know, aligning software.
And, um, but I'm just really interested in having visited
both regional councils, EOCs and my local council.
I've been there during a flood in the year and review.
I've been there with the minister for a visit, been
to the Bunker with, um, I guess there's two aspects.
One, obviously there's a discussion at the moment about how,
uh, regional councils will look in the future and, and
therefore potentially within the framework is, is that,
you know, that mes combined board,
look at what that looks like.
There, there might be a question or opportunity
to look at the model of how many layers
of EOCs do we need in a given area.
Um, but secondly, I'm, I'm just interested
to hear about how that works.
Do we have clarity about the handover of responsibilities,
alignment in terms of what falls to a, a district council,
what might fall to a regional council? Yeah.
Yeah. I, I think, and I'll ask Jennifer
to comment a moment because, uh, she's done 21 years now.
She got an award this morning.
Um, but, uh, I'll ask Jennifer to talk about,
uh, about it in a minute.
Um, but essentially there is, there is clarity,
but clarity of roles and responsibilities is something
that's being tidied up in the, the new build.
Mm-hmm. Um, so we do understand the, the thresholds where,
um, where it becomes beyond the capacity
of whether it's a local, uh, INT or EOC, uh,
or that it crosses boundaries
and needs to be coordinated across boundaries
or to, uh, to manage, um, capabilities and resources.
Then it gets elevated up to the regional level, uh, whatever
that looks like in the future.
Uh, and then beyond that, um, on the three occasions
that it has occurred, um, to the, the national level of,
um, of, what are they calling it, uh, declarations,
the National Declaration Status emergency, uh,
and that's only happened three times.
Mm-hmm. Um,
but in the interim, there is that requirement to lean in
because there's recognition that at local level, um,
whether it is EOC, uh, whether it is regional,
there's insufficient resources for some of these big events,
or the fact that they take, uh, quite some time
to, to evolve.
Uh, and when you've got, let's use mul growth four
and a half, um, to do it for the whole region, um,
it's just insufficient in terms of the way
that the system has evolved.
And mold was potentially a good example
because it's a unity.
So there isn't another regional layer.
And, and, you know, you mentioned the number of people,
but the unity of command, perhaps, if I can use that Lance,
that that, that that brings compared to, say, if I think of,
uh, the last flood we had this time last year, wife
and I, the river coming through, um,
I'm not thinking of that regional
or local EOC, there was no issue on that occasion.
But, you know, potentially, does
that come under the local council who's responsible
for the ca the town?
Is it the regional council who's
responsible for the catchment?
Is, is there clarity, is the unity of command in terms of
where that breakdown happens?
And and do you see any difference between, say,
what might happen in the lower North island to
what might happen at the top of the south where, um,
Tasman Nelson and Malborough or unitary council?
So you don't have those dual layers?
Uh, I, there is a difference,
and I'll get, uh, Janet perhaps comment on it,
but I will say that down Wors Worcester's, not formal, um,
down in, uh, Nelson Malborough Tasman, they work very,
very closely together.
Um, and they communicate quite effectively across that, uh,
that piece, both at Merrill level, um,
but also at emergency management level
That's left for, that's not those vertical layers of the,
the regional council and then the sort of the
Yeah. District
councils within It.
So those ones are different.
Yeah. I think, um, the devolve model, certainly, just
to answer your first question, obviously, uh,
the government worked to be carried out there.
We will work very closely with DIS that work unfolds,
the c DM group model
and the devolve structure from local to regional
to national, um, is based around,
not necessarily a regional council,
but the consortium of all of those councils coming together.
And so the emergency coordination center at a
regional level Yes.
Is not the regional council's ECC,
it's the, it's the whole region.
So all of those mayors, all of those councils, um,
that is there to serve them individually as a,
but as a collective.
Um, so as that work unfolds, I, I guess the key question
for us to explore with DIA
and with the setting groups themselves is do we continue
to have that need for a regional consortium?
I would suggest it's a yes,
because I look at all the events
over the last 20 plus years.
Mm-hmm. Um, thinking about Canterbury as an example,
10 councils.
Um, there are often big severe weather events
or fires where a number of those councils will have
to respond within their own local environment,
but they actually need the support of the wider region
and the wider region, not being the regional council,
but the region or of the assets
and, um, capabilities in that region, which is
where the ECC can be stood up in support
of those individual local authorities.
Yeah. And or a declaration of a state
of emergency across the region to support
Them. And I understand
that regional
approach versus regional council.
Yeah. Thank you.
Am I right though in, in thinking,
is it a straight cookie cutter approach across all of them?
Or if I think of Horizons, they operate their own EOC,
and then the sub councils or the district
and city councils within them have their own EOC in greater
Wellington in the EE region.
Um, I,
I ne I haven't seen personally the greater Wellington, uh,
uh, if they have an e OOC or something,
but it's all controlled at a local level.
But do they all have the same relationships
or is it quite niche to that individual region?
It, it's effectively the same.
I mean, it, it's regionally absolutely in terms of
who might be in the, the, the CDM group
or the care who actually they work to.
Um, but if I take Wellington, for example,
there are EOCs in hu Lower Hu Wellington City, uh,
and then there's a regional,
then there's a regional coordinating body
for when it goes beyond that.
Um, the event that occurred in 20 21, 22,
the sea surge, uh, I dunno whether you remember that.
There was massive sea search
that was expected from the Chatham Islands that was managed
by, uh, Wellington City primarily with oversight by,
um, I I declared it by,
and I had to leave my home thanking.
Um, but that, that oversight
and coordination, if it had actually manifested
as it might have been inspected to, uh, you require
that oversight to bring those,
those councils together. Mm-hmm. So,
So my fi my final question,
and then I'll probably use up my time,
but, um, as, as we sort of look to,
and there's this pro process coming up with sort
of re envisaging how, how regions might approach things.
Is, is the future the way you see it purely,
if you could just be purely pick the best approach
for NEMA from emergency management, would it be having
multiple layers or would it be regardless of
what council structures look like, would it be having,
for example, in, in the case you just used a Wellington
Regional EOC, and that can operate for a,
a local event in the huts
or a wider Wellington regional event, but,
but we can sort of concentrate
and pull all those assets in the one place
and the experience, the skills, the training.
Do you, do you have a sense of,
I, I think, uh, I think both can work,
and I haven't really thought of, of
what would, uh, what would work.
I think, um, nationally managing 78 EOCs, for example,
would be a bit of a burden, but,
but at regional level, um,
I haven't really thought about that too deeply.
Mm-hmm. You've, you've worked a bit more on that space, Jen.
Yeah, it's a, I mean, it's a really fair question,
and the model across the country is different
because of the different models in each of the, um, yeah.
Regions and the unitary authorities certainly, um,
would be a good question to actually, to ask them ask,
do they find their way
of managing across the region easier than having all
of those different local authorities?
But it, it's probably horses for courses and,
and really digging into it.
And I guess the bill provides that opportunity
to ask those questions as well.
What I will say, Tim, just to finish off, is, is
that if this EAC over here, um,
works in a particular way, it's doctrine, it's procedures,
it's processes, it's rules
and tools need to be the same in terms of with,
with obviously the local issues around hazards the same
as this EOC at the other end of the country so
that they can support each other.
And we're seeing more and more of that, uh, over the,
the four years that I've been here in comparison to
where it was previously, uh, where one c DM group
or EOC uh, personnel can actually now go down
and support, uh, different groups.
That's absolutely essential, irrespective of
what the model might have been.
Thank you. Appreciate the engagement. Thank
You. Andy, did you have
a primary
Or, yeah, yeah. Look,
um, I was just wanted to, to understand, um, if, uh,
Nina leans in at any stage, two situations
where the way in which a council is managing, um, a,
a hazard, um, goes wrong.
Uh, the examples that I, I'd give, that I can recall
of late, well, one is the wireless situation where clearly,
um, well, the court case around it at the moment,
I think still, um, so wrong, four
to 600 houses got flooded as a result of that.
Um, then you had the two in Canterbury, um, more recently,
the the little river one, which again, didn't clear that,
didn't the, the, the flood barriers for the lake to get it
to drain and like likewise, uh, cell in district with, uh,
lake sme do, do you look at those and say, well, hang on.
Is your management managed the best way it can do
to avoid having a, a hazard situation?
Certainly we did for those.
In fact, both of those, in fact, the minister, um, asked all
of them years whether in fact they were comfortable with,
with, uh, the processes, uh,
and did they have the mechanisms in place
to make the right decisions, uh, at the time.
Um, and, and I'm familiar a little bit with both of them.
Um, you know, it's, it's always,
it's always easy in hindsight.
Well, that's to say that you've got wrong.
I'm gonna ask them after the event.
Yeah, exactly. But how you try to avoid it happening
Again. So, so,
you know, they've gotta have the mechanisms in
place to get the advice.
Uh, and I just say advice.
So I'd say right advice, the advice, um, from all
of those stakeholders, um, in a manner
that is sufficiently timely to, to make the right decisions.
Um, but they've gotta make that decision.
Uh, and that's key, uh, with, with their knowledge,
their training, their, their advice, uh, at
where they are in that particular point in history.
And that's quite difficult. Um, those two cases,
certainly in hindsight, um, you'd,
you'd wonder whether in fact those right decisions were
made, those were the ones that were made. So,
So I took, uh, what the minister said in terms of, um,
declaring emergencies,
and this is not about declaring emergencies,
but as Pats responding to avoiding an emergency early so
that, you know, you're not having the regrets in these
three situations.
I think they were basic saying, haven't reached the trigger,
haven't reached the trigger, oh,
now reached the trigger in terms of water levels, et cetera.
And, uh, it's now too dangerous to fix it.
Now we've got, now we've got a problem.
Yeah. So they didn't do
what the minister was suggesting, in effect.
Um, yes. Look, I, I wasn't there, I wasn't in the room.
Um, I understand there were some quite heavy discussions
down in Canterbury, uh, with, with all of the,
the players early in the piece.
Um, but I'm not familiar with it.
I do know that the legislation in terms of opening up bars
and things like that, does not sit,
could have within emergency management, um, per se.
Uh, and they've got to manage all of that.
And that was quite difficult to unpick, um, during,
for example, and,
and where we needed to get to in terms
of resolving some of the issues up there. Um,
Can I, can I ask you the question about where,
because I've asked this question
before about, um, Nina's role in terms of planning
might park that for moment, but your role in terms of,
'cause a lot of interfacing legislation,
environmental legislation, planning rules, also other stuff,
water conservation orders, all, all, all sorts
of different things, but your role in those things is to,
is there something that should be looked at
and the ability to tidy those things up so that in an event
of a pending, uh, situation, uh,
that sometimes you can actually do something
that's an emergency emergency response before, um,
before an event evolves to the point
where it's causing danger to people, property, whatever.
Yeah. Tina, do you need to comment on
That? Yeah, I will.
You're particularly in the recovery space.
Well, yeah. And even in the hazard risk management space,
you're right, there's all of these, um, parallel pieces
of legislation and tools for local government
to manage the hazards and risks that River Management
and Soil Conservation Act being crime,
a primary one alongside the RMA Local Government Act.
Um, the role of the C DM Act
and seeding groups is
to look holistically across their region,
consider the hazards and risks they're exposed to,
and ensure that they are
as a collective managing those hazards
and risks to best effect, including risk reduction.
And the CD CDM places that, um, requirement on them,
section 17, I think it is, um,
On them being local, on them
Being the seating group, mayors
and chief executive councils.
Um, so the CDX doesn't, isn't the lever
that they manage the hazard risks through,
but it requires them to look holistically at the
hazards and risks in their region.
And to use those various other levers like the RMA
or the, um, river Management, soil Conservation Act
to manage bars is the bar that Dave just talked about.
So it's more of a holistic approach.
So, so if I can just finish, finish off that one.
So in the situation that they're aware there's a problem,
so say we've got a responsible to do something about this,
but for example, the RMA becomes a barrier to being able
to do anything at that point in time
and saying, well, we've gotta change the district plan.
Well, that'll probably take 10 years. So we have five
floods by the time we've had 10 years.
Um, so my point is,
have we actually got the legislative framework, which allows
the people who are responsible for dealing with hazard
to actually do the job as opposed to be prevented hospital
by even their own rules from doing so?
I think it's probably an area for other agencies in terms
of those agencies administering those pieces of legislation
to, to best answer.
Well, I, I get that. Mm-hmm.
But your your, your responsibility about emergency
management, theirs isn't,
and so if we leave it to them, they won't
Certain Certainly. That's why
I'm raising. Yeah, yeah.
No, certainly in terms of roles
and responsibilities and clarity of those roles
and responsibilities across the legislation, that's, uh,
some of the work that's being done under the new bill.
Um, I, I think it's, it's very,
I think it's rightly placed at local government level
because they understand their hazards.
That's fine. Um, in terms of the ability to make decisions
early at the national level of something
that you're not aware of, how it's going to unfold
around the hydrology, for example, of, um,
of the y Aurora River, uh, that becomes very difficult to,
to do that, uh, at this end.
And, and, you know, my, my personal view, uh,
is that it is right
and appropriate that those who have the knowledge, um,
who have the tools at their disposal,
make those decisions on those hazards
that they are very familiar with.
As I said, that doesn't mean that they won't get it wrong at
times, um, because that's the reality and nature of,
But my question really is not who makes the decision,
but their ability to make whoever the, who is their ability
to make the decision at all, whether it's centrally done
or whether it's locally done, it's their ability
to make the decision because of other things
and other bits of legislation would prevent them doing so.
Yeah.
And again, Jenny, you might like to comment,
but in terms of the state of local emergency,
they have the authority to make the decision
So they can override.
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
I think going back also to the minister,
the point was the minister on the recent, um,
flood risk management matter, that posture to, to
go in early, lean in, uh, and make sure that those hazards
and risks are being very carefully monitored
and actively managed is certainly
a changing posture of our portfolio.
I, I would suggest as well, it's, um,
we have a hazard risk management team that does also talk
to, there's a lot of work, especially in flood risk
management, a lot of work going on across government with,
and other partners as well.
Um, and so I think the key is how we work
with local government and support local
government with that decision making.
Yeah. Um, and to certainly be leaning in hard
because we don't want any of these events
to be unfolding into emergencies if we can help it.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, I just wanted to ask a question, which I, I think,
so two, two things really, which I think are linked, um, is
I think when we looked at the audit results, there were
around, um, six measure
or four of the six measures that were not achieved in terms
of the public's, um, preparation for emergency.
So the, um, awareness of, uh,
people being of dangerous
and natural hazards was not as good as it could have been.
And another other things action during an earthquake
that those measures.
Uh, the question I have is, um, is it possible
for Nima to improve those without receiving additional
funding to be able to do your job?
Um, you know,
and this is just meant in
that I think we all want these numbers to go up
and we know that it's really important for safety,
but in terms of looking last year compared to this year,
and I know you haven't had cuts like some agencies,
but is there a need for increased investment in NEMA
to be able to achieve some of those aims? Uh,
I mean, yeah, it's a, it's a really good question.
Um, uh, yes
and yes, and yes.
Uh, you know, we get 600,000 is what we budget
for public education, uh, campaigns that allows us really
to do just one, uh, event per year,
sometimes two plus the shakeout, uh, and so on.
We've had some quite good success in terms of one
or two of the, um, the initiatives that we've,
we've begun this year.
Um, you know, 765,000 I think participated, registered, uh,
in Shake out, 66,000 in schools challenge.
Um, we have a new billboard, um, uh, initiative
that, that puts flood, um,
and weather warnings onto all electronic billboards
within the region and so on.
Um, they will help,
but 600,000 still only buys you one campaign, uh,
against all of the hazards that we have.
Um, one of the areas that we're, we're working, uh, towards
with, um, education, uh, is, is
how we actually create intergenerational awareness, uh,
of the hazards and the actions to take, um,
through the schools programs.
Um, that's, that's a work in, in being.
Um, but again, you know, without, uh, additional resources,
it becomes really challenging and we've gotta be quite
innovative, uh, in terms of how to, to manage that.
Um, some of the things that I'm keen to, to work on, uh,
in the next calendar year is there's a social responsibility
of, um, big businesses, uh, you know, Qantas.
They have, um, their hazard awareness
or warnings, um, on the, the, um, screens during flights.
Uh, they have, uh, in some areas just on the, the end
of your till, um, uh, that you get from a, a grocery store,
uh, what the, you know, get ready safe web, uh, website is,
or long strong get mark gone.
So we, we've gotta be quite innovative in terms of
how we do it, and it's gotta be continuous and,
and from multiple, um, streams.
Um, but 600,000 is not very much for a big organization,
uh, not a big organization, a small organization,
but a, uh, a a big risk profile and hazard, um, program.
Yeah. Um, I agree.
And I think that, um, it seems that you're doing a, a lot
with, not, not very much in terms of that, um,
that funding moving forward.
And of course, I suppose it's linked to the structure
of nema, which is very much that you,
you can't go into an area and run everything for people.
It's that local. Um,
I think you've got three words somewhere in your document.
So it starts with a local response
and then it moves up, um, for having
that support at the, at the national level.
Just a kind of related question around that is, um,
I was really impressed when I was heard about the work
that's been going into the education program for the, um,
a AF eight, um, Alpine fault, uh, potential.
Um, well, the thing that's going to,
that we know is gonna happen in the South island at some
point in the, in the relatively high likelihood of
that happening in the next 50 years, um, is
that I give you an opportunity to comment on that program
and the involvement that, um, Nima has had with it at all.
Or, or if there are other agencies that can,
other organizations that can lean
into running those programs.
But in terms of the, when I look back, um, you know,
two years ago at the briefing to the incoming minister
around the most likely kind of natural hazard events
that you wanted to highlight, of course it was the, um,
alpine fault earthquake, but also the subduction zone.
And I know also, you know,
in Taranaki there's a relatively high likelihood of
that incident as well.
Um, and of course other natural hazards around, um,
New Zealand especially where there are large concentrations
of the population, like for example, in Auckland,
even a more minor incident could be quite catastrophic.
So just, so first of all, like on the Alpine, um,
fault earthquake education program,
and then is there any thought to those other hazards kind
of running similar programs
or to other programs that exist to inform those communities
of those specific risks?
There, there are other programs, um,
or pretty well all of the, the hazards,
although East Coast Labs due to funding, uh, as part
of the science program has, um, closed,
we're just looking at how we can actually, um, reinvigorate
that East Coast Labs is the subduction zone in Tsunami.
Mm-hmm. Um, there's one for the earth, uh,
for the Auckland or organic field.
I can't recall what that's called. There's one for Taranaki.
Uh, and there is the one, of course, down in, um,
the south island with the alpine pulp.
That one in particular has been particularly successful, um,
along with East Coast Labs in terms
of the education programs,
but particularly the Alpine fault.
Uh, and NEMA has helped to, to fund that along with other,
uh, contributors such as EQC,
the what's the science program called, um,
Our Resilience Natures Challenges.
Yeah. Nature Challenges, uh, and so on.
Um, and that will be ongoing, certainly in terms
of our funding through until next, actually,
I think this might be the final
financial year that we are funding.
Um, part of that, and we really need to look at
how those programs are funded.
'cause as you've identified, they are absolutely critical,
uh, in terms of, of understanding those hazards.
And they take it to communities, they take it to schools,
um, as that's a remarkable piece that has been done through,
um, you know, through the passion of, uh,
the scientists in particular that are involved in it.
Um, we've had success, I think, in space weather, uh,
recently, just in terms of the, the public awareness
of the fact that there is this thing called space weather.
They're up there, um, which is sort of both exciting
and, uh, novel and scary at the same time.
Uh, and we've also had successes, say with East Coast Labs
and, and the Ang space
and what, uh, in particular they have plenty, uh,
have done with that program.
And our ability to take the, the science, uh, that's
behind those programs, the modeling that's
behind those programs, and utilize those
for exercising at local level, at national level,
at international level for that matter.
Uh, in terms of, uh, so the, the base foundation programs
that have been done, um, of concern, uh,
I think in the future is, is a real understanding
of Taranaki and that's being reinvigorated at the moment,
but I'm not sure where the funding's coming for that.
Mm. And Auckland, um, and,
and the volcanic field, which is, uh, you know, it's twice
as likely than a major crust fault here in Wellington, um,
of occurring, which, which we're starting to get on top of.
And, and I say it's really early in the journey in terms
of planning, uh,
and how you evacuate, um, a city the size of Auckland.
And it's a bit like, a little bit like what's happening in,
uh, Naples at the moment
and the planning that's going into there.
So those programs are essential.
Um, they are foundational, I would argue, uh,
and they, they incorporate, uh, a lot in terms of, uh,
the other programs of work around quake core, uh,
around the work that GNS is, is doing around the work that,
um, that the National Hazards Commission have been doing
for the last, uh, five, 10 years.
Thank you. I might come back to Facebook.
I know Francisco has a, oh
No, you, you Asked the question I wanted
to ask about the audit measures
and the reasons why they weren't, um, meeting
Those. Oh, sure.
So, um, some of us attended the space weather, um,
exercise that you, that you ran.
I think, I remember when I first came to this committee, um,
two years ago, and there was something in the annual
or briefing or something about space weather.
And I think I mentioned it
and I think some people in the room
who'd never heard of it before.
Um, do you wanna just take the opportunity
to explain space weather in that exercise
and you know, what you, what you learned from, from that?
Uh, I'll, I'll talk about space weather generally,
and I'll pass over to step who, uh, runs the exercise
and was very familiar with the exercise itself.
I was actually a way for it, uh, disappointing.
Um, the, so Space Weather's a
and I don't know what how familiar the, the panel is,
but, um, it is a, every 11 years, the cycle, the sun goes
through a cycle where the poles effectively, uh, slip
and, uh, flip.
And, and as a consequence of that, there's a lot
of activity on the, the surface.
Uh, and it can shoot off, um, flares,
it can shoot off radiation things and,
and, uh, CMEs, um, coronial, mass ejections,
and they all have different effects.
But, uh, the effect if a large event occurs on Earth,
and we're talking what's called a G five plus event, um,
can be potentially catastrophic.
Over the last, um, 12 months, I think there's been 11
that have been monitored of G four plus, um, events
of which two have come pretty close to, uh, earth
or hit glancing blows.
Uh, the effect is on power grids in particular, um,
but also communications space assets, uh,
which impacts things like GPS and and so on.
Um, I will say that Segment is, is considered, uh,
one if not, uh, the most, uh,
robust country in terms
of our power grids because we only have one.
Um, but that doesn't mean that it won't affect us.
Uh, and we have and are recognized for, uh, the work
that Trans Power have done, uh, in, um, uh,
ensuring up that, that grid, uh,
but also for the space where the plan that we've developed.
And more recently, and I'll flip over to, uh, to Steph now,
uh, the exercise program that we put in place,
and along with that, the education program that's gone
through, um, through the media
and it, it's not a deliberate one,
but it's the fact that it is novel
and the media have wanted to, to pick this up and,
and just understand it a bit more. Steph.
Yeah, thanks Steve. Um, yeah,
so the exercise itself really was focused on improving
inter-agency cooperation on our own operational readiness
and also on testing, uh, that plan.
So it brought in about 23 different agencies and,
and involved, uh, I would say at least half
of the seating groups across the country.
Um, the other, uh, I, I suppose bonus of
that is we were able to bring in, in working
with DPMC on National Resilience
System, so there'll be a watch group.
Uh, there's been a watch group meeting already
and there'll be an o ds, uh, meeting next year.
What it really brought out was, uh, how, uh,
how fast and how, um,
difficult clear decision making is going
to be in an event like that.
And, uh, it really hones us in from a policy point
of view on where those decision making, um, rights sly
with respect to the grid,
because transparent, of course, have
to make some big decisions,
and we have to figure out how to very quickly
communicate the impact of those decisions
and manage the consequences.
The thing that was really useful other than the cooperation
was, uh, we had a, a real, uh,
weather event shortly afterwards,
down Southland, as you know.
And, uh, both of those really exposed how, uh,
reliant New Zealanders are on continuous power
and perhaps how much more work there is to do in terms
of individual
and business resilience in the event of power going out.
So, um, yeah, it was a good step in the right direction
and using a, uh, uh, a novel event, which got a lot
of people quite interested.
So I think pretty effective from our point of view.
Remind me, where, where are we in the 11 year cycle?
2025 was, oh, that's this year.
There's peak, um,
but there's actually more activities that comes off, right.
Solar maximus. So it's through until 2027. Interesting.
Uh, at the end of 2027 is the period that we're looking at.
That's still, um, uh, significant activity from the sun.
Thank you. Uh, s or Oh, I'll sub off that,
and then if you can ask a different
one, I'll do a very quick sub.
Okay. So just, so those 11 ever 11 year cycle,
but you said some of 'em had a glancing blow.
How often does it actually affect the planet?
Uh, the last, the last big one
or 20 May 12th, 2024
was the last large one.
That was the one where we had all the
auroras here in Wellington.
You could see them right through the wire wrapper.
Uh, and that's how people generally see, uh, the,
the events, uh, and effects of solar weather.
Um, but if you go back to, um, 1998,
I think there's one in 2024.
Yeah, uh, sorry, 20 2004.
Um, but about every 300 years, uh,
is there is an expected, there is expected to be
a significant event that will hit earth.
Um, the last one was, uh, 1859 in terms
of a, um, G five event
that was known as the Carrington event.
Um, and, and so if we get one of that size,
even if it doesn't hit, uh,
or effect so much the Southern hemisphere,
the effect on the, the Northern Hemisphere is
potentially so catastrophic.
The second and third order effects that you get from that,
particularly on logistics, supply chains
and so on, will, will fundamentally affect, uh,
New Zealand in terms of, of
how we go about our, our business.
So, sorry, uh, that comes a slightly bigger question.
So how one, two
or 300 years, slightly more reassuring than once every
11, but still there.
Um, but how, um, how long will it take?
Would it take in that event
and then go, given that we've never actually seen one in a
electrified, um, world, um, how long would it take
to recover from that kind of event?
Obviously you've got logistics
and supply chains is one thing, but actually put an
electricity grid, for example, back together again.
What does it, what does it do? Yeah.
What's, what's the potential damage that does physically?
The the exercise was, I would argue at a moderate level.
Um, and we talked about two weeks.
I think it was two weeks to two minutes. Yeah.
But, um, but,
but there are some safeguards within the New Zealand
electrical system, but if we lose a transmission station,
for example, um,
and it's a massive event
that affects the global supply chain.
New Zealand is at the bottom of that global supply chain.
There's bespoke, we don't have very many
of them in New Zealand, uh, in terms of being able to,
to put those in other places.
The United States, an article came out in the United States.
Um, if they have a, a huge event that affects the
East coast, uh, of the United States, uh, then they talk
of anything up to 12 years to recover from it.
Um, and that's why in this particular article, um,
which was in the New Yorker in 2024,
they talked about it being the biggest
existential threat that they face.
Um, because of, again, that, that second,
third order effects in particular of, you know,
imagine just no power on the East Coast.
Just imagine even in bacard, no power
for two to three weeks.
Mm. Um, or, um, or west
or which was another area that was exercised, I think.
Yeah. So there are, we have an understanding of where it is
and, and how the, the power grid is going to be shut off.
Um, but I don't think we can really comprehend
or imagine, you know, that failure of imagination of
what it might be like, um, being in place
where there is no power for a month, two months.
It does in terms of social license
and how that, that affects, um, our relationship, uh,
with each other, with the government, with,
um, with everything.
Okay. So very significant. Yeah.
Can I ask one another Totally different question in terms
of primary Yes.
Um, we've got, um, Francisco, I no. Yep. No, he's
Happy here. Okay. It's just, um,
the question I asked last time
you were here, so I certain asked the minister that, um,
was it in its Nina's role
beyond its immediate emergency response, sort of once,
and that's about the, the role in terms of planning
or encouraging people to build things in the right place.
And we've seen quite a number of, now we've seen a whole lot
of buyouts being done for houses put in place, which would,
you know, problematic in Auckland.
Um, the role that you potentially got sort
of waving the flag and also the insurance industry
relationship, the insurance industry on doing on that.
She's waving a flag saying,
actually maybe this is not a good place to build that
or build it in a different way so that you don't get flooded
or fall off a cliff or whatever as it might be.
What's so the ability to try and avoid damage if possible?
Yeah. I mean, I put advocacy, but Jenna
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, we have a very strong advocacy role,
the National Disaster Resilience Strategy,
and the whole holistic framework
for emergency management is centered around risk reduction.
Um, so, uh, we again, work a lot with research
and science partners with local government, with within HC
with all the various partners, um, in the advocacy space.
Um, and certainly you are mentioning a recovery
that is your window of opportunity.
If, as we have across the country legacy situations
where we have unfortunately built in places
of high risk exposure Mm.
That is your window of opportunity to, so you have an
Get get em out If possible. Absolutely. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, we do some pretty dumb things. Sorry,
Keep going.
You finished? No, I'll get myself in trouble.
We do some pretty dumb things in terms of, of
where we build Yeah.
Um, and how we build.
And, um, you know, what I did like, uh,
in Auckland was the fact that all golfers are going to, uh,
vilify me forever, uh, is the fact that, um, you know,
golf course is now seen as a wet area and a runoff.
Um, we've gotta be smarter in terms of doing those,
those green initiatives.
Yeah. Uh, in terms of managing what is going to be, um,
more intense, more frequent events, uh,
that will be exacerbated by climate change.
We're seeing that all over the world. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and yet we continue to, um,
'cause they make, um, decisions which aren't in the,
the best interest of the future, uh, generations.
Mm-hmm. If I could just follow up one other thing, sorry,
just the, in terms of the adaptation work that's been driven
by Minister Watson, there's an opportunity there
to bring together, uh, through setting groups.
There's the setting group plan process.
They have to identify hazards and risks in their area. Yes.
Their region Yes. And plan for both their management
and of course, emergency management. So, well, ideally
Their avoidance would be a good
Thing. Absolutely.
And so those adaptation plans,
the opportunity there to bring those two mechanisms together
to really advance thinking
and pre-plan for how they would manage. So,
So what I'm really looking for is, is CDM groups, nema
to be leaning into planning decisions to try
and make sure that we don't, we minimize the risks
that we put people in the future property in the future
Too. That's the intent.
Yeah.
So, so do you, and do you have any involvement, sorry,
I've asked plenty of West case questions recently, but, uh,
and on the, the West Watership Yes, you do a lot.
I thought, I thought you did. Okay. That, can you tell us,
tell us a little bit about your role there.
Sure.
Go. Starting with the recovery, obviously starting
with the response, the recovery. Would your
Sub, do you wanna ask your sub now before Andy's
Oh, my sub is related to,
I'm happy before I end. You do finish
The, Paul is a really good example of a community
with a legacy issue, high risk exposure,
and in the recovery, uh, ourselves, Nima
and DIA established a steering group to support the, um,
local mayor
and council bringing on board iwi and other partners.
Um, think transport was there from memory as well.
And really starting to look at what was the future
for Westport in particular.
Um, looking at the power model, um, protect, um,
adapt retreat, accept,
they've obviously gotta look at all the
nature-based solutions there.
What are, what are the decisions
and how could they, um, traverse with the community options
for how they manage those hazards and risks going forward.
Um, that's resulted in, uh, a good, um, outcome, I think for
that community where they are accepting the potential
to shift certain parts of the community and future.
They've identified land across the river. Yep.
Um, so they're starting to think as a council about
how they can further develop that in, in future.
Um, and of course, the last of the para model is accept.
There will be a level of acceptance as well.
And that's where emergency management can work
with those communities on evacuation planning, et cetera,
because you cannot manage all aspects of the risk.
But certainly that is a, a really good community
and council that aren't shying away from the issue.
They've really leaned into it with their, um, the guidance
of their previous mayor, Jamie Klan. Mm.
And they've got a quite a good
education program down there.
Visited when I was
Absolutely. Which, um, all Main Street
kind of, so you can go in
and learn about the risks.
Francisco. Thank
You Chair. Um,
it's been encouraging
to hear you talk a a little bit about the upcoming, um, uh,
revisions and Climate Change Response Act in terms
of the adaptation frameworks and planning around that.
How involved has NMA been in the
drafting of that legislation?
You in a working group? Um, there are various levels.
There's a chief executives group. I'm on board.
There's a DC group
and various, um, officials groups including working groups.
So, um, a lot of work across agencies
and certainly in terms of, um, like I was saying
before, with the adaptation space,
there's obviously coming together of adaptation
and emergency management.
So I'm looking at ensuring there's no siloed approach, um,
with the way that the RMA is being reformed in the Emergency
Management Act as being reformed
and bringing those two aspects together.
But I can't get ahead of what gets revealed in time
over the coming weeks and months. Yeah.
Wonderful. To
Now we do have, um, a scheduled 10 minute break,
but I just wanted to check with you that the other option is
that we could just finish earlier.
Um, yeah. Are you, is I just checked with,
and I think I know Tim's,
Tim wants to get away. I
think Tim, I, I think I know Tim's view,
but I just wanted to double check
with the especially three sitting at the table
that you don't need to, we duck out or anything.
Okay. We'll keep going and we'll finish a bit earlier.
Um, and we won't keep you, you know, if we,
we finished our questioning, we won't keep you, um,
longer than necessary.
Um, so, um, yeah.
So I've got, um, a few other questions that I just wanted
to, um, ask.
The, since we last saw you,
you've had a technically quite a big move from, um, being
inside DPMC to being inside, um,
the Department of Internal Affairs.
Uh, would, do you want to talk to us a wee bit about, um,
the reasoning for that and how that move has gone
and whether that will affect, um, any of the actions
that you take moving forward?
Yeah. Um, I mean, the, the reasoning was
to streamline DPMC to focus on, uh, the delivery
of the governance program primarily.
Um, we still have very close relationships through, uh,
through the national resi, uh, resilience.
Yeah. National Resilience Board, uh,
and that strategic level, uh, of governance
around hazards and so on.
Um, and the shift over to DIA, uh, is, uh,
is progressing well, uh, in terms of we're across there.
Um, we think that, uh, as we bid in,
because it's only been a couple
of months at the most actually, um, as we bid in, uh,
we will benefit, um, significantly in terms of just the size
of the organization
and the additional resource that they can bring in support
of the work we do.
And there's also a very natural alignment in terms
of local government, um, and, uh, and nema.
Um, we've still got some work to do.
It's been a little bit clunky to be fair, um,
particularly in the IT space,
but that was always going to be the case.
Uh, and, and they're always far more difficult than people
actually realize until we start getting into the,
the real mahi to, to understand how we are going to do it.
Um, but I say in the longer term, uh,
I think it will be beneficial, um, both for us, uh,
and for more broadly, uh, emergency management general.
Thanks. And it'll be good to just have an update, uh,
as well, you know, in due course about how
that's going when you've had an opportunity
to be in a wee bit.
The other question I had was, um, around the building
of the new bunker.
Um, if you had any information you could share
with the committee around how that's going and bunker?
Pardon? Not a bunker. Well,
Not a bunker. It's,
Uh, well, I mean Above upgrade.
Yes. The new bunker. Yeah,
The new. So
let, how's it going? What's it looking like?
Um, what will happen with the existing, um, bunker in terms
of its utilization once this is,
Yeah. In terms of
the, the current bunker, once the, the new
National Emergency Management facility, uh, is stood up, um,
I don't know, that'll be over to, um, parliamentary services
and, and the government, I guess the speed correction,
But it won't be Utilized,
but it won't be utilized for us.
Yeah. So, so the new, um,
facility is about the same size in terms of capacity.
Um, but it's modern, uh, and, uh,
and the technology
and everything else that's in there will be, um,
far more advanced than what we've got at the moment.
That includes the new common operating pitch that,
uh, the minister mentioned earlier.
Uh, and along with that, um, will, will be the ability to,
um, I use term mirror, uh, the common operating picture to,
uh, the Cape Shepherd Place facilities
where we currently are, so that the overflow
for these big events, um, can be incorporated with a,
as a common understanding of what's going on, um, and,
and be able to do, whether it's planning, um,
maybe the recovery planning, uh, intelligence work, uh,
the logistic, not logistics, the, um,
the liaison officer and so on.
Um, being able to be separate,
but connected to, uh,
with a reach back capability provides a far greater
capacity than what we have at the moment.
Uh, and, and we're looking forward to it.
It's, uh, as I understand it's still, uh, on schedule,
on budget, uh, and, and when is it?
And due to be open sometime next year, uh,
towards the end of next year.
And will you have kind of an official day
where you switch from if there's an emergency today, we go
to the bunker, or if there's an
emergency today, we go to the,
Yeah, we won't, uh, I mean, we won't close down the bunker
until we've, we've done a, uh, launch as in a soft launch,
make sure everything's working and everything else.
Um, so we would have that, that formal sort of handover,
changeover, um, process.
Uh, and, you know, as the glitches
that are often the case with new, uh, facilities,
new buildings are ironed out, then we'll be able
to close down the bunker and hand it back.
You don't wanna make a pitch, um, to the speaker or,
or anyone to be able to keep the bunker as a backup.
Uh, we actually have, um, backup facilities identified,
uh, that are, um, you know, backup to the, as JP would say,
uh, back, sorry, John Price.
The backup to the backup to the backup.
I don't know how many backups to those, but, um,
but there are backup facilities that are,
have been identified, um, are available.
And that includes if, if Wellington, uh, is, um,
is damaged beyond the ability to operate from here, uh,
with an alternate national emergency management facility
being developed, uh, in conjunction
and in partnership with a UT, uh, in Auckland.
And that's not the, um, the race course.
That is not the race course.
Okay. Can you tell us any more about that?
Or is that just, is that gonna be brand new?
Sorry. Uh, no, it's, it's the Manakau campus.
Um, and we, it's a beautiful, we developed a, uh,
a really close relationship with a UT.
Um, they're very keen
and we're just working through the final details, um,
of something that is longer term.
Uh, it's a really obvious term, elegant solution in terms of
what might have cost to do a bespoke, um, thing as opposed
to fit into something that a UT prepared to,
to partnership with.
Mm-hmm. I think triple redundancy
is the buzzword these days.
So triple redundancy, triple bottom line.
That's why language act.
Uh, so I've got, I'm just checking with committee members.
I've got some further questions.
I've got one. Okay. Andy, I've got one more.
I just going to this, um, this, this risk, um, from here,
'cause it's a welling pony, um, most of the time, um, the,
uh, the, the relative risks
of each individual area, I mean, it's always been welling.
There's been earthquake, earthquake, earthquake.
But you look at that and actually some other places in the
country have even higher risks.
Absolutely. To what degree, to
what degree is this information?
I mean, I'm sure the insurance industry's got that in front
of them, but to what degree do they have a look at this
and go, yeah, we, okay, we got that.
We understand that and they affect that,
but they keep on talking about risk based, um, insurance.
To what degree are they actually doing that?
I, you know, I think they are, uh,
new Zealand's in an envious position, um, in that we have,
um, the National Hazards Commission, which underwrites Yes,
you know, individual property.
Um, we have, uh, one of the highest still in the world of,
uh, insurance penetration.
Uh, it's getting harder to pay for it, though.
It is getting more expensive to pay for it.
I'll come to that. Uh, we have, um,
what is a relatively low GDP to debt ratio.
So the ability to to, to, um, buy reinsurance
for New Zealand is still there.
Yes, it's going to get more expensive, uh, in some areas.
I understand that that may already be the case in places,
uh, some parts of Ton.
Um, but, but the insurance, um,
or the reinsurance providers that, uh, that we spoke
to over in the UK recognize that New Zealand
one understands its hazards
because they do a lot of, uh, research themselves,
understands its hazards
and are putting in place
through things like the national adaptation plan
through things like, uh, education programs and, and so on.
Um, uh, uh, putting those in place that provide resilience
to, um, to the country.
The reality is, if you're on the coast, I'm on the coast,
uh, if you're on the coast, um, climate change says
that the, the sea level is going to rise, and that is,
or that makes us, uh, those of us
who live there more vulnerable.
Um, and there is a cost to that.
Um, and, you know,
they still talk about Christchurch being the highest single
reinsurance, uh, event that has occurred.
Um, in terms of recent history.
Um, there is a change coming
and we've gotta be as smarter about where we build, um,
about how we build, uh,
but also in terms of developing resilience across
the nation, um, from education through to training, through
to, um, how and where we build, uh,
and the, the, um, um,
protections that are, that are being put in place
around flood protection and so on.
You mentioned partnership, just, um,
Uh, please,
You might just follow up with, um, information,
recent events.
We've, um, partnered with Insurance Council,
New Zealand Natural Hazard Commission,
and Nima have just recently entered into a partnership.
And it's really around how do we, um, share more data,
have more proactive programs of work
that all free entities want to see progress in,
and particularly with public education,
people understanding their hazards, their risks.
Um, it's, um, fair to say that, um,
both NHC and ICNZ
and the border insurance sector want
to see New Zealanders managing their risks
and investing in resilience measures so
that their risk is reduced.
Um, and so it's a, I think it's a really good, um,
advance in this space and we can report more.
It's, it's only early days.
Um, and certainly there was a recent, um, trip
to the United Kingdom, um, that, again,
those parties all went together and traveled together to try
and promote the position.
New Zealand is taking here to build resilience
and partner across the insurance sector
with government as well.
And they see New Zealand very favorably.
Um, you know, they're, they're quite strong in that.
Um, and, and, you know, considering the hazards
and everything else, uh, you might look at them quizzically,
but they, they genuinely, uh,
see New Zealand favorably in terms of reinsurance,
which is really important.
Mm-hmm. Um, and to stay on top of it
With, um, um, just a kinda supplementary question
on the insurance point.
I'm aware that some insurance companies are now offering
quite granulated data in relation
to individual properties in relation to their risk profile,
and that, um, you know, as a tool that they obviously, uh,
are utilizing to be able
to provide more accurate information
in relation to premiums.
Is that something that you, that you think should
be provided publicly?
If that type of information is available that, um, you know,
individual risk hazards in, in addition to
what would be available on, on a limb is available to
New Zealanders so they can plan better for the,
the hazards that they will likely face?
My personal view, absolutely.
Um, and,
and we do that through the, uh, the tsunami mapping
that's just been, that's published now and is online.
Uh, so anybody can type in their address
and see what their risk is from a tsunami perspective.
We're doing it with a, uh, compliant buying project between,
um, earth sciences, um, national Hazards Commission,
nema, uh, for flood mapping, uh, and,
and MFE, uh, for flood mapping.
So, so, you know, my view is absolutely should be conscious
of what they're buying so that they do it, uh, deliberately.
Um, you know, again, I I look at,
people look at me occasionally saying, you know, you run,
you run emergency management,
but you live right on the seashore.
And I'd say absolutely, um,
because it's about knowing what the, the hazard is,
knowing the risk, um, knowing there may be a cost to that.
Um, but you gotta live for today.
That's very kiwi. It is.
Um, I had a, um, question related to relation to the,
uh, scheme that you set up.
I think following the, uh, review into the, uh,
north island weather events in Cyclone Gabriel,
I think it's called AKA the aka yep.
Yeah. The, um, um, engagement that you have, uh, with Maori.
I just wanted to have an update on that in relation to how
that kind of relationship is going
and how you see that forming a part of, um,
the engagement moving forward with a new legislative regime.
Uh, it's, it's developing.
I say it's developing, it was practiced in, um, a couple
of exercises this year,
and I get staff to talk about, uh,
the space weather side of it.
But just to, to segue a little bit, you know, I think
what we often lose sight of is that that iwi Maori,
there are 800 marai, uh, and facilities across New Zealand.
There's 750 plus, uh, in the North island.
When you actually map those, you know, as a,
as a resilience, um, level, uh,
or a level of resilience that's
provided to New Zealand in terms of facilities,
organization, food, um, sleeping course
and everything else, there's no
country in the world that's got that.
And we've gotta work out how to enable that, uh,
and, uh, empower
that more effectively than we do at the moment.
And some of that, uh, comes through in, in the bill
and RI is, is a coordinating mechanism that helps
facilitate some of that, uh, capability.
And it is different from anything else in terms of
that network because it's networked through fka
and somebody in, um, uh,
RO right up north can talk to somebody in Bluff.
Uh, it's networked through business.
It's networked through, um, the ability, the Kumar of Iron
as it's often called.
Um, that ability to, to do that, uh, as say, is something
that is unique in the world and,
and people are really envious of it.
And I say Tahiri is a mechanism that allows us, um, to,
to help manage some of that, uh, during an event.
Um, because as say they do have these unique capabilities
that they bring to the party, Steph, um,
they were stood up in space weather.
Yeah, yeah. We, we practiced that function
and we use it really, uh, I think one area,
what was really successful is to triangulate
between the national and local level to see it,
because of course, Nima iss not trying to achieve all
of the engagement with Maori from the national level.
And those regional, uh,
land-based relationships are really important.
And so in many ways, we can use that function, uh, to,
uh, reach out and,
and they might have a back channel through, um, the methods
that the CM group themselves may or may not have.
And so we can help connect them at that, at that level.
There. I, I think also more widely, um,
we are also, we, we bring that idea of, uh, the, each group,
uh, mobilizing all the assets in, in its area together.
And so we, uh, when we took to looked at the, uh, system,
um, improvement program, we ran a substantial ger here in,
um, in, uh, lower to try to bring together
as much perspective from across, uh, uh, Maori
as we could into the area.
And we, and we're establishing much more regular contact,
um, at that level.
So it's gotta be both national and, uh, regional and local.
Thank you. I, I think I agree with
what you've just said in terms of, it's such an incredible,
um, unique, uh, resource that we have that we,
that is undoubtedly not, um, not just there by luck,
but developed through having various, um, disasters, um,
throughout the time, um, that Maori had been in New Zealand.
The, the other question I had was when I visited some people
in t who did have to respond to some of these events, um,
it, it sometimes I think for them seems like, um,
they're often called on to respond,
but that same, it's not necessarily recognized, um,
effectively after the fact.
So for example, they might take people in
and they might, um, feed them,
and then, uh,
afterwards there might be a miracle relief fund
or something, and they might be trying
to recoup some of those costs.
And there'll be questions like, you know, how many people
exactly was were staying there and,
and do you have receipts for the food that you bought?
Those, those type of things, which kind
of go against the kind of in initial disaster, Mona,
which is, um, uh, we are so lucky
to have in those situations.
Has there been any thought about how
that could be more streamlined so people can effectively,
um, provide, um, the, the monarchy that they want
to in those situations,
but not feel that they are, are kind of being scrutinized
or shortchanged in the long run?
Due to understandable compliance in safeguards
in relation to public money,
There has been a, um,
a real bur under the saddle, I think.
Um, not just for Iwi Maori,
but for other groups, other community groups as well.
Um, during Cycl
and Gabrielle, we set up the, the first sort
of high trust model, um, for the first, I can't remember the
total amount, um,
but the first part of that to ensure
that there's liquidity and everything else.
Um, but also as part of that longer term response
and recovery, but be conscious of the, obviously
of the taxpayers, um, funding.
But we are putting together, uh, guidelines
that actually assist, I thought, uh, guidelines that assist,
um, assist in how to actually, um, navigate
the, the quite torturous, uh, route at times of, of
where these finances sit.
And they're not just in, in NMAs bucket, um, it's MPI,
it's welfare, it's, uh, TPK and so on.
Um, but it does need to be, uh, as say, cleaned up, uh,
streamlined and everybody has to be aware of what the, uh,
the rules and thresholds and everything are.
Um, but that first piece in the, the immediacy of response,
uh, to my mind needs to be high trust.
And so that worked, I think, well, uh,
when it was introduced during 2023,
but the word wasn't out there in
terms of how it would been done.
Yeah. Just, just on there, just remind me of the open
Anniversary floods, um, where the, in the community,
local community, um, there was no template.
And so we had to work as a local community
with Auckland Council and with the mayor, newly elected.
'cause there was no template, there was nothing.
And so it was ground up.
What we did find though, was
what was the important thing was the funding
and where it should go and the community's response.
So it sort of grew in that three and a half weeks,
but there was no template.
It was just the little fall on it.
Um, and people were trying to do good and respond
because it wasn't just the people from the local area.
We had over half of the community that came from
outside the affected area.
So there were a lot of learnings,
but it's really important to make sure that engagement
and the high trust model template is in
place or things like that.
Yeah, absolutely.
And, um, again, one of the jobs, uh,
I've never actually introduced, uh, Steph Mitchie, uh,
he's been brought on as the,
the Deputy Chief Executive Assurance.
And looking at all of those plans and, and,
and everything else that goes with that, um, will be part
of the work that we're getting after, um, over the,
the coming and I've gotta say years,
because it does take time to, to embed these.
Um, but that issue of, of clarity, that issue
of one gateway, um, is, is absolutely critical in terms of,
of where we need to go and, and trust, uh, and,
and social license, you know, that's the, the critical, um,
piece that we need to ensure all the way through.
Continue lose that, you know, it's very hard to get back.
Um, so, so I think, uh, you know,
we've still got a long way to go.
Um, we are learning, um,
but, uh, there's still quite some way to go yet.
Thank you. Thank
You. Just have a few
more, um, questions.
The current, there's been a few events recently
where there've been some issues around information
sharing from agencies.
Um, so when there's been a response, um,
maybe some organizations have had information that is,
would be useful to the response,
and there's been, um, as I understand delays in,
in making sure that that's received.
Is there, has there been any thought
or will this new bill, um, be able to, um, manage some
of those challenges more effectively?
Or is there more we need to do in this space?
Uh, there's definitely more that we need to do.
There are, um, a couple of initiatives
that government initiatives, uh, in part, uh, by the GDC,
government, digital Commissioner,
G-C-D-O-G-C-D-O,
That one, um, uh, and,
and we're working very closely
with them about, uh, data sharing.
You know, it's absolutely critical.
In fact, it it's the, the life blood, uh, of anything,
emergency management, if you don't have the data,
then you can't, uh,
make the right decisions in a timely fashion.
Um, but there's also a project that's ongoing with, um, MFE,
uh, a digital data sharing, uh, initiative.
Um, and, and between those, uh,
and the relationships that we have already, uh,
with infrastructure providers, for example, uh,
once we get the platform, uh, established, then that should,
uh, should help overcome some of that.
Um, it is challenging though,
because there is privacy issues.
Uh, and there are also that that commercial edge that, um,
commercial companies get is often through their data.
Um, but they have been very, very positive, uh,
moves particularly in insurance
during the, the recent events.
I think that was in, uh, nri, wasn't it,
during the NRI events, uh, so
that they can get the money out the door fast
to get people back up, uh, and running.
Um, you know, for our, uh, for our cop, uh, just
thinking back to, to what the team are that are,
are working on that, they talk about there being, you know,
up to 240 layers of data that need to be built, uh,
across the, the nation on that to, to provide a picture so
that we get that shared situational
understanding of what's going on.
So it goes beyond awareness into understanding so
that governments can make the right, uh, choices for
the recovery and consequence management in terms
of long-term issues that come with that.
I don't know whether that answers your question.
Yeah. And I think it does. And I mean, um,
I think it'll be good to, when we see the bill, to be able
to have a look at that and also assess if there's,
because it does seem like, you know,
when you're in an emergency situation, it should be, um,
hands on deck trying
to make sure that we solve these issues.
So it's sometimes disappointing to hear that, um, you know,
that com companies have barriers in place
that prevent them from, from sharing that information.
I just had a question about the new earthquake standards
that, uh, in relation to building that have been.
Um, I know it's not something that ne uh,
Nima is doing directly, but I just wondered if,
if you had been consulted on that
or if you had a view on, um, that program in relation to,
um, lowering the, well, changing the standards, uh, that,
uh, are required now for, for buildings in terms
of earthquake, uh, resilience in certain areas?
Well, I'm aware of it, um, mainly through, through
what I've read, but policy may have
been involved to comment on it. I
Have to double check that. But
I would expect we would've been, in terms of anything
to do with the building act,
we've always been heavily involved in, in the past,
but I'm not privy to the exact nature of
It. Yeah.
So you haven't raised any concerns that you're aware
of Yeah.
At this stage. Um, okay. Thank you.
I'll just check to see if any other
colleagues have questions.
I just had a final one around, um,
in May you released the National Resilience System Handbook,
DC DPM C did, yeah.
Yeah. So do, do you wanna speak at all to that in terms of
how, uh, that would be utilized?
Utilized? So that was still when you were
part of DPMC, wasn't it?
It was part of when we were still DPMC.
It was released by DPMC. Right, okay.
And replaced the old, uh,
national Security System Security System handbook.
Um, you, you know, it's, uh, it's got the framework,
it's the governance, um, mechanisms within that framework.
Uh, there are some changes in that.
Um, in the past we had, uh, the
National Hazards Board
and the working groups underneath that, uh, at oDesk above,
that was about it this year, recognized the fact
that there is a national strategic level, um, for, uh,
national resilience, uh, that will be, um, governed
by the National Resilience Board.
Um, underneath that, there will be two boards at this stage.
Uh, one is based around hazards, which will be chaired
by the chief executive of MFE.
Um, and that's the, the standard of weather, um,
earthquakes, geo hazards in particular, uh, and,
and an operational board, uh, which will be chaired by Nima,
which looks at the integration at the operational level, um,
of all of the impacts that are governs
through the other side of it.
Um, those are the key issues. Is there anything else?
No, I think it's just we're working closely with DPMC
as they're refining the National Risk and Resilience system.
They've obviously, um, they would released the cabinet paper
with the related material.
Their focus areas are to strengthen, uh,
governance across risks and resilience.
And we we're certainly participating a lot with that work.
Yeah. And, and as this just pointed out,
there's some clarity in terms of roles
and, uh, responsibilities.
And, and I've gone to strategic coordinating, uh, agencies,
um, which look at from a strategic perspective.
So, uh, for example, NPI are a strategic, uh,
coordinating agency for anything to do with, uh,
the biohazard space, um, primary industry, biohazard space,
uh, and lead agencies, um, which, which provide
that operational space, for example, FE as a lead agency
for, for fire and so on.
Sorry, I just want to, um,
just cover one more area in your response
to the written questions.
There was, um, a grant provided to the government of Tonga.
And so I just wondered if you wanted to touch on at all, um,
the, uh, relationship that Nima has with the Pacific, um,
in terms of, um, the emergency management, um, role?
Yeah. Um, it's very close and it's getting closer.
Uh, we have now, um, two embedded, uh, NEMA personnel,
uh, one in Tonga, one in, uh, samo,
uh, all funded by.
So the, the programs are funded through, um,
the impact lens.
Uh, but the mechanism for enacting those, um,
programs is generally through nema,
but also defense if it's a, uh, a big issue
or, uh, occasionally fire and emergency as well.
Um, but the relationship's very close.
And so an embed with, um, Tonga and samo, uh,
and that is to help uplift their capability
and provide, uh, additional, um, resource to them.
Uh, and likely, uh, that program is,
is going to be extended.
Uh, we have within that program also, the, uh,
and it's only two years old now,
I think, uh, three years old.
Uh, the disaster management ministerial group,
um, and a, a group below that at the director level, uh,
they met just, um, actually
during the space weather exercise, so
that must been November, uh, early November.
Uh, and, and they are looking at ways to, to bring
and enable and strengthen the resilience of, um,
the southwest Pacific, uh, particularly with Australia
and New Zealand, but also them working together to, um,
to resolve issues themselves.
And that includes things like a warehouse programs.
So they have preposition stores, uh,
through different regions.
Um, and, uh, you know, they will continue to be, be hit hard
and, and some such as, uh, Toko la uh,
and, uh, uh, you know, they don't see themselves being
around in, in 30 years or so.
Mm-hmm. Um, that they will just cease to exist.
Uh, so it's a very, um, it's a very real
situation in terms of climate change for these areas.
And as so they get battered,
particularly over this next period, uh,
of the cyclone season, uh, from now through till March.
Uh, and as say, some mechanisms
and progress, real progress has been made, uh, in terms
of early warnings, in terms of this pre-positioning,
in terms of mechanisms that enable defense forces, uh,
from across the region to,
to work together more effectively
than, uh, we have in the past.
Do you know if, um, if there've been requests
of the New Zealand government to, to do more on this space?
Or do you, do you feel that we're available and,
and willing to help in the, in the, in the way
that they would want us to be? Uh,
I, I can tell you that they, they regard us very highly,
uh, in terms of, um, of both the,
the effort that's being put in, uh, in terms of the,
the funding for different programs, uh, again, through, um,
but also the relationship
and the trust that they have, uh, in the New Zealand model
of, of how we do business, um,
which is different from Australia, um, and,
and different from other, other nations.
But, um, but it is a very close relationship to the point
where they actually bought, uh, or offered
and we accepted, uh, support for Nle from Tonga,
from Fiji, uh, in particular.
And, and that just binds, you know, those relationships, uh,
that are very personal and,
and, you know, the team know each other
very well personally. Hmm.
Nice. It's really nice. The, I think the mommy has a, just
A quick, so would you, um, in your view, would you say
that we are more advanced now in terms of our relationship
with Zealand Al Tier, uh,
and Pacific, more in Australia and Pacific?
No, it's a different relationship
'cause they have more money. It's
A different relationship.
Um, and,
and there are strengths that Australia brings,
uh, that we couldn't bring.
Um, and there are strengths that we bring, uh,
that Australia, uh, can't bring to the same extent
because we have a huge, um, population here in New Zealand.
So, so those know they're different strengths.
We need both, um, and we bring them both together.
Thank you. Thank you.
I'll just check if any final questions, anyone
or any final closing comments that you wish to make.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks real.
Yeah, great start. Good luck with the summer. Thank you.